# Fit the base imputation model and get parameter estimates

`draws` fits the base imputation model to the observed outcome data
according to the given multiple imputation methodology. According to the
user's method specification, it returns either draws from the posterior
distribution of the model parameters as required for Bayesian multiple
imputation or frequentist parameter estimates from the original data and
bootstrapped or leave-one-out datasets as required for conditional mean
imputation. The purpose of the imputation model is to estimate model
parameters in the absence of intercurrent events (ICEs) handled using
reference-based imputation methods. For this reason, any observed
outcome data after ICEs, for which reference-based imputation methods
are specified, are removed and considered as missing for the purpose of
estimating the imputation model, and for this purpose only. The
imputation model is a mixed model for repeated measures (MMRM) that is
valid under a missing-at-random (MAR) assumption. It can be fit using
maximum likelihood (ML) or restricted ML (REML) estimation, a Bayesian
approach, or an approximate Bayesian approach according to the user's
method specification. The ML/REML approaches and the approximate
Bayesian approach support several possible covariance structures, while
the Bayesian approach based on MCMC sampling supports only an
unstructured covariance structure. In any case the covariance matrix can
be assumed to be the same or different across each group.

## Usage

``` r
draws(data, data_ice = NULL, vars, method, ncores = 1, quiet = FALSE)

# S3 method for class 'approxbayes'
draws(data, data_ice = NULL, vars, method, ncores = 1, quiet = FALSE)

# S3 method for class 'condmean'
draws(data, data_ice = NULL, vars, method, ncores = 1, quiet = FALSE)

# S3 method for class 'bmlmi'
draws(data, data_ice = NULL, vars, method, ncores = 1, quiet = FALSE)

# S3 method for class 'bayes'
draws(data, data_ice = NULL, vars, method, ncores = 1, quiet = FALSE)
```

## Arguments

- data:

  A `data.frame` containing the data to be used in the model. See
  details.

- data_ice:

  A `data.frame` that specifies the information related to the ICEs and
  the imputation strategies. See details.

- vars:

  A `vars` object as generated by
  [`set_vars()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/set_vars.md).
  See details.

- method:

  A `method` object as generated by either
  [`method_bayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md),
  [`method_approxbayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md),
  [`method_condmean()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  or
  [`method_bmlmi()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md).
  It specifies the multiple imputation methodology to be used. See
  details.

- ncores:

  A single numeric specifying the number of cores to use in creating the
  draws object. Note that this parameter is ignored for
  [`method_bayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  (Default = 1). Can also be a cluster object generated by
  [`make_rbmi_cluster()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/make_rbmi_cluster.md)

- quiet:

  Logical, if `TRUE` will suppress printing of progress information that
  is printed to the console.

## Value

A `draws` object which is a named list containing the following:

- `data`: R6 `longdata` object containing all relevant input data
  information.

- `method`: A `method` object as generated by either
  [`method_bayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md),
  [`method_approxbayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  or
  [`method_condmean()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md).

- `samples`: list containing the estimated parameters of interest. Each
  element of `samples` is a named list containing the following:

  - `ids`: vector of characters containing the ids of the subjects
    included in the original dataset.

  - `beta`: numeric vector of estimated regression coefficients.

  - `sigma`: list of estimated covariance matrices (one for each level
    of `vars$group`).

  - `theta`: numeric vector of transformed covariances.

  - `failed`: Logical. `TRUE` if the model fit failed.

  - `ids_samp`: vector of characters containing the ids of the subjects
    included in the given sample.

- `fit`: if
  [`method_bayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  is chosen, returns the MCMC Stan fit object. Otherwise `NULL`.

- `n_failures`: absolute number of failures of the model fit. Relevant
  only for `method_condmean(type = "bootstrap")`,
  [`method_approxbayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  and
  [`method_bmlmi()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md).

- `formula`: fixed effects formula object used for the model
  specification.

## Details

`draws` performs the first step of the multiple imputation (MI)
procedure: fitting the base imputation model. The goal is to estimate
the parameters of interest needed for the imputation phase (i.e. the
regression coefficients and the covariance matrices from a MMRM model).

The function distinguishes between the following methods:

- Bayesian MI based on MCMC sampling: `draws` returns the draws from the
  posterior distribution of the parameters using a Bayesian approach
  based on MCMC sampling. This method can be specified by using
  `method = method_bayes()`.

- Approximate Bayesian MI based on bootstrapping: `draws` returns the
  draws from the posterior distribution of the parameters using an
  approximate Bayesian approach, where the sampling from the posterior
  distribution is simulated by fitting the MMRM model on bootstrap
  samples of the original dataset. This method can be specified by using
  `method = method_approxbayes()]`.

- Conditional mean imputation with bootstrap re-sampling: `draws`
  returns the MMRM parameter estimates from the original dataset and
  from `n_samples` bootstrap samples. This method can be specified by
  using `method = method_condmean()` with argument `type = "bootstrap"`.

- Conditional mean imputation with jackknife re-sampling: `draws`
  returns the MMRM parameter estimates from the original dataset and
  from each leave-one-subject-out sample. This method can be specified
  by using `method = method_condmean()` with argument
  `type = "jackknife"`.

- Bootstrapped Maximum Likelihood MI: `draws` returns the MMRM parameter
  estimates from a given number of bootstrap samples needed to perform
  random imputations of the bootstrapped samples. This method can be
  specified by using `method = method_bmlmi()`.

Bayesian MI based on MCMC sampling has been proposed in Carpenter,
Roger, and Kenward (2013) who first introduced reference-based
imputation methods. Approximate Bayesian MI is discussed in Little and
Rubin (2002). Conditional mean imputation methods are discussed in
Wolbers et al (2022). Bootstrapped Maximum Likelihood MI is described in
Von Hippel & Bartlett (2021).

The argument `data` contains the longitudinal data. It must have at
least the following variables:

- `subjid`: a factor vector containing the subject ids.

- `visit`: a factor vector containing the visit the outcome was observed
  on.

- `group`: a factor vector containing the group that the subject belongs
  to.

- `outcome`: a numeric vector containing the outcome variable. It might
  contain missing values. Additional baseline or time-varying covariates
  must be included in `data`.

`data` must have one row per visit per subject. This means that
incomplete outcome data must be set as `NA` instead of having the
related row missing. Missing values in the covariates are not allowed.
If `data` is incomplete then the
[`expand_locf()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/expand.md)
helper function can be used to insert any missing rows using Last
Observation Carried Forward (LOCF) imputation to impute the covariates
values. Note that LOCF is generally not a principled imputation method
and should only be used when appropriate for the specific covariate.

Please note that there is no special provisioning for the baseline
outcome values. If you do not want baseline observations to be included
in the model as part of the response variable then these should be
removed in advance from the outcome variable in `data`. At the same time
if you want to include the baseline outcome as covariate in the model,
then this should be included as a separate column of `data` (as any
other covariate).

Character covariates will be explicitly cast to factors. If you use a
custom analysis function that requires specific reference levels for the
character covariates (for example in the computation of the least square
means computation) then you are advised to manually cast your character
covariates to factor in advance of running `draws()`.

The argument `data_ice` contains information about the occurrence of
ICEs. It is a `data.frame` with 3 columns:

- **Subject ID**: a character vector containing the ids of the subjects
  that experienced the ICE. This column must be named as specified in
  `vars$subjid`.

- **Visit**: a character vector containing the first visit after the
  occurrence of the ICE (i.e. the first visit affected by the ICE). The
  visits must be equal to one of the levels of `data[[vars$visit]]`. If
  multiple ICEs happen for the same subject, then only the first non-MAR
  visit should be used. This column must be named as specified in
  `vars$visit`.

- **Strategy**: a character vector specifying the imputation strategy to
  address the ICE for this subject. This column must be named as
  specified in `vars$strategy`. Possible imputation strategies are:

  - `"MAR"`: Missing At Random.

  - `"CIR"`: Copy Increments in Reference.

  - `"CR"`: Copy Reference.

  - `"JR"`: Jump to Reference.

  - `"LMCF"`: Last Mean Carried Forward. For explanations of these
    imputation strategies, see Carpenter, Roger, and Kenward (2013), Cro
    et al (2021), and Wolbers et al (2022). Please note that
    user-defined imputation strategies can also be set.

The `data_ice` argument is necessary at this stage since (as explained
in Wolbers et al (2022)), the model is fitted after removing the
observations which are incompatible with the imputation model, i.e. any
observed data on or after `data_ice[[vars$visit]]` that are addressed
with an imputation strategy different from MAR are excluded for the
model fit. However such observations will not be discarded from the data
in the imputation phase (performed with the function
([`impute()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/impute.md)).
To summarize, **at this stage only pre-ICE data and post-ICE data that
is after ICEs for which MAR imputation is specified are used**.

If the `data_ice` argument is omitted, or if a subject doesn't have a
record within `data_ice`, then it is assumed that all of the relevant
subject's data is pre-ICE and as such all missing visits will be imputed
under the MAR assumption and all observed data will be used to fit the
base imputation model. Please note that the ICE visit cannot be updated
via the `update_strategy` argument in
[`impute()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/impute.md);
this means that subjects who didn't have a record in `data_ice` will
always have their missing data imputed under the MAR assumption even if
their strategy is updated.

The `vars` argument is a named list that specifies the names of key
variables within `data` and `data_ice`. This list is created by
[`set_vars()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/set_vars.md)
and contains the following named elements:

- `subjid`: name of the column in `data` and `data_ice` which contains
  the subject ids variable.

- `visit`: name of the column in `data` and `data_ice` which contains
  the visit variable.

- `group`: name of the column in `data` which contains the group
  variable.

- `outcome`: name of the column in `data` which contains the outcome
  variable.

- `covariates`: vector of characters which contains the covariates to be
  included in the model (including interactions which are specified as
  `"covariateName1*covariateName2"`). If no covariates are provided the
  default model specification of `outcome ~ 1 + visit + group` will be
  used. Please note that the `group*visit` interaction is **not**
  included in the model by default.

- `strata`: covariates used as stratification variables in the bootstrap
  sampling. By default only the `vars$group` is set as stratification
  variable. Needed only for `method_condmean(type = "bootstrap")` and
  [`method_approxbayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md).

- `strategy`: name of the column in `data_ice` which contains the
  subject-specific imputation strategy.

In our experience, Bayesian MI (`method = method_bayes()`) with a
relatively low number of samples (e.g. `n_samples` below 100) frequently
triggers STAN warnings about R-hat such as "The largest R-hat is X.XX,
indicating chains have not mixed". In many instances, this warning might
be spurious, i.e. standard diagnostics analysis of the MCMC samples do
not indicate any issues and results look reasonable. Increasing the
number of samples to e.g. above 150 usually gets rid of the warning.

## References

James R Carpenter, James H Roger, and Michael G Kenward. Analysis of
longitudinal trials with protocol deviation: a framework for relevant,
accessible assumptions, and inference via multiple imputation. Journal
of Biopharmaceutical Statistics, 23(6):1352–1371, 2013.

Suzie Cro, Tim P Morris, Michael G Kenward, and James R Carpenter.
Sensitivity analysis for clinical trials with missing continuous outcome
data using controlled multiple imputation: a practical guide. Statistics
in Medicine, 39(21):2815–2842, 2020.

Roderick J. A. Little and Donald B. Rubin. Statistical Analysis with
Missing Data, Second Edition. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey,
2002. \[Section 10.2.3\]

Marcel Wolbers, Alessandro Noci, Paul Delmar, Craig Gower-Page, Sean
Yiu, Jonathan W. Bartlett. Standard and reference-based conditional mean
imputation. Pharmaceutical Statistics. 21(6): 1246-1257, 2022.
[doi:10.1002/pst.2234](https://doi.org/10.1002/pst.2234)

Von Hippel, Paul T and Bartlett, Jonathan W. Maximum likelihood multiple
imputation: Faster imputations and consistent standard errors without
posterior draws. 2021.

## See also

[`method_bayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md),
[`method_approxbayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md),
[`method_condmean()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md),
[`method_bmlmi()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
for setting `method`.

[`set_vars()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/set_vars.md)
for setting `vars`.

[`expand_locf()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/expand.md)
for expanding `data` in case of missing rows.

For more details see the quickstart vignette:
[`vignette("quickstart", package = "rbmi")`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/articles/quickstart.md).
