# Analysis of Covariance

Performs an analysis of covariance between two groups returning the
estimated "treatment effect" (i.e. the contrast between the two
treatment groups) and the least square means estimates in each group.

## Usage

``` r
ancova(
  data,
  vars,
  visits = NULL,
  weights = c("counterfactual", "equal", "proportional_em", "proportional")
)
```

## Arguments

- data:

  A `data.frame` containing the data to be used in the model.

- vars:

  A `vars` object as generated by
  [`set_vars()`](https://insightsengineering.github.io/rbmi/reference/set_vars.md).
  Only the `group`, `visit`, `outcome` and `covariates` elements are
  required. See details.

- visits:

  An optional character vector specifying which visits to fit the ancova
  model at. If `NULL`, a separate ancova model will be fit to the
  outcomes for each visit (as determined by
  `unique(data[[vars$visit]])`). See details.

- weights:

  Character, either `"counterfactual"` (default), `"equal"`,
  `"proportional_em"` or `"proportional"`. Specifies the weighting
  strategy to be used when calculating the lsmeans. See the weighting
  section for more details.

## Details

The function works as follows:

1.  Select the first value from `visits`.

2.  Subset the data to only the observations that occurred on this
    visit.

3.  Fit a linear model as `vars$outcome ~ vars$group + vars$covariates`.

4.  Extract the "treatment effect" & least square means for each
    treatment group.

5.  Repeat points 2-3 for all other values in `visits`.

If no value for `visits` is provided then it will be set to
`unique(data[[vars$visit]])`.

In order to meet the formatting standards set by
[`analyse()`](https://insightsengineering.github.io/rbmi/reference/analyse.md)
the results will be collapsed into a single list suffixed by the visit
name, e.g.:

    list(
       trt_visit_1 = list(est = ...),
       lsm_ref_visit_1 = list(est = ...),
       lsm_alt_visit_1 = list(est = ...),
       trt_visit_2 = list(est = ...),
       lsm_ref_visit_2 = list(est = ...),
       lsm_alt_visit_2 = list(est = ...),
       ...
    )

Please note that "ref" refers to the first factor level of `vars$group`
which does not necessarily coincide with the control arm. Analogously,
"alt" refers to the second factor level of `vars$group`. "trt" refers to
the model contrast translating the mean difference between the second
level and first level.

If you want to include interaction terms in your model this can be done
by providing them to the `covariates` argument of
[`set_vars()`](https://insightsengineering.github.io/rbmi/reference/set_vars.md)
e.g. `set_vars(covariates = c("sex*age"))`.

## Weighting

### Counterfactual

For `weights = "counterfactual"` (the default) the lsmeans are obtained
by taking the average of the predicted values for each patient after
assigning all patients to each arm in turn. This approach is equivalent
to standardization or g-computation. In comparison to `emmeans` this
approach is equivalent to:

    emmeans::emmeans(model, specs = "<treatment>", counterfactual = "<treatment>")

Note that to ensure backwards compatibility with previous versions of
`rbmi` `weights = "proportional"` is an alias for
`weights = "counterfactual"`. To get results consistent with `emmeans`'s
`weights = "proportional"` please use `weights = "proportional_em"`.

### Equal

For `weights = "equal"` the lsmeans are obtained by taking the model
fitted value of a hypothetical patient whose covariates are defined as
follows:

- Continuous covariates are set to `mean(X)`

- Dummy categorical variables are set to `1/N` where `N` is the number
  of levels

- Continuous \* continuous interactions are set to `mean(X) * mean(Y)`

- Continuous \* categorical interactions are set to `mean(X) * 1/N`

- Dummy categorical \* categorical interactions are set to `1/N * 1/M`

In comparison to `emmeans` this approach is equivalent to:

    emmeans::emmeans(model, specs = "<treatment>", weights = "equal")

### Proportional

For `weights = "proportional_em"` the lsmeans are obtained as per
`weights = "equal"` except instead of weighting each observation equally
they are weighted by the proportion in which the given combination of
categorical values occurred in the data. In comparison to `emmeans` this
approach is equivalent to:

    emmeans::emmeans(model, specs = "<treatment>", weights = "proportional")

Note that this is not to be confused with `weights = "proportional"`
which is an alias for `weights = "counterfactual"`.

## See also

[`analyse()`](https://insightsengineering.github.io/rbmi/reference/analyse.md)

[`stats::lm()`](https://rdrr.io/r/stats/lm.html)

[`set_vars()`](https://insightsengineering.github.io/rbmi/reference/set_vars.md)
