# Fit the base imputation model using a Bayesian approach

`fit_mcmc()` fits the base imputation model using a Bayesian approach.
This is done through a MCMC method that is implemented in Stan and is
run by using the function
[`rstan::sampling()`](https://mc-stan.org/rstan/reference/stanmodel-method-sampling.html).
The function returns the draws from the posterior distribution of the
model parameters and the `stanfit` object. Additionally it performs
multiple diagnostics checks of the chain and returns warnings in case of
any detected issues.

## Usage

``` r
fit_mcmc(designmat, outcome, group, subjid, visit, method, quiet = FALSE)
```

## Arguments

- designmat:

  The design matrix of the fixed effects.

- outcome:

  The response variable. Must be numeric.

- group:

  Character vector containing the group variable.

- subjid:

  Character vector containing the subjects IDs.

- visit:

  Character vector containing the visit variable.

- method:

  A `method` object as generated by
  [`method_bayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md).

- quiet:

  Specify whether the Stan sampling log should be printed to the
  console.

## Value

A named list composed by the following:

- `samples`: a named list containing the draws for each parameter. It
  corresponds to the output of
  [`extract_draws()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/extract_draws.md).

- `fit`: a `stanfit` object.

## Details

The Bayesian model assumes a multivariate normal likelihood function and
weakly-informative priors for the model parameters: in particular,
uniform priors are assumed for the regression coefficients and
inverse-Wishart priors for the covariance matrices. The chain is
initialized using the REML parameter estimates from MMRM as starting
values.

The function performs the following steps:

1.  Fit MMRM using a REML approach.

2.  Prepare the input data for the MCMC fit as described in the `data{}`
    block of the Stan file. See
    [`prepare_stan_data()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/prepare_stan_data.md)
    for details.

3.  Run the MCMC according the input arguments and using as starting
    values the REML parameter estimates estimated at point 1.

4.  Performs diagnostics checks of the MCMC. See
    [`check_mcmc()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/check_mcmc.md)
    for details.

5.  Extract the draws from the model fit.

The chains perform `method$n_samples` draws by keeping one every
`method$burn_between` iterations. Additionally the first
`method$burn_in` iterations are discarded. The total number of
iterations will then be
`method$burn_in + method$burn_between*method$n_samples`. The purpose of
`method$burn_in` is to ensure that the samples are drawn from the
stationary distribution of the Markov Chain. The `method$burn_between`
aims to keep the draws uncorrelated each from other.
