# Generate data for a single group

Generate data for a single group

## Usage

``` r
generate_data_single(pars_group, strategy_fun = NULL, distr_pars_ref = NULL)
```

## Arguments

- pars_group:

  A `simul_pars` object as generated by
  [`set_simul_pars()`](https://insightsengineering.github.io/rbmi/reference/set_simul_pars.md).
  It specifies the simulation parameters of the given group.

- strategy_fun:

  Function implementing trajectories after the intercurrent event (ICE).
  Must be one of
  [`getStrategies()`](https://insightsengineering.github.io/rbmi/reference/getStrategies.md).
  See
  [`getStrategies()`](https://insightsengineering.github.io/rbmi/reference/getStrategies.md)
  for details. If `NULL` then post-ICE outcomes are untouched.

- distr_pars_ref:

  Optional. Named list containing the simulation parameters of the
  reference arm. It contains the following elements:

  - `mu`: Numeric vector indicating the mean outcome trajectory assuming
    no ICEs. It should include the outcome at baseline.

  - `sigma` Covariance matrix of the outcome trajectory assuming no
    ICEs. If `NULL`, then these parameters are inherited from
    `pars_group`.

## Value

A `data.frame` containing the simulated data. It includes the following
variables:

- `id`: Factor variable that specifies the id of each subject.

- `visit`: Factor variable that specifies the visit of each assessment.
  Visit `0` denotes the baseline visit.

- `group`: Factor variable that specifies which treatment group each
  subject belongs to.

- `outcome_bl`: Numeric variable that specifies the baseline outcome.

- `outcome_noICE`: Numeric variable that specifies the longitudinal
  outcome assuming no ICEs.

- `ind_ice1`: Binary variable that takes value `1` if the corresponding
  visit is affected by ICE1 and `0` otherwise.

- `dropout_ice1`: Binary variable that takes value `1` if the
  corresponding visit is affected by the drop-out following ICE1 and `0`
  otherwise.

- `ind_ice2`: Binary variable that takes value `1` if the corresponding
  visit is affected by ICE2.

- `outcome`: Numeric variable that specifies the longitudinal outcome
  including ICE1, ICE2 and the intermittent missing values.

## See also

[`simulate_data()`](https://insightsengineering.github.io/rbmi/reference/simulate_data.md).
