# Fit the base imputation model on bootstrap samples

Fit the base imputation model using a ML/REML approach on a given number
of bootstrap samples as specified by `method$n_samples`. Returns the
parameter estimates from the model fit.

## Usage

``` r
get_draws_mle(
  longdata,
  method,
  sample_stack,
  n_target_samples,
  first_sample_orig,
  use_samp_ids,
  failure_limit = 0,
  ncores = 1,
  quiet = FALSE
)
```

## Arguments

- longdata:

  R6 `longdata` object containing all relevant input data information.

- method:

  A `method` object as generated by either
  [`method_approxbayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  or
  [`method_condmean()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  with argument `type = "bootstrap"`.

- sample_stack:

  A stack object containing the subject ids to be used on each `mmrm`
  iteration.

- n_target_samples:

  Number of samples needed to be created

- first_sample_orig:

  Logical. If `TRUE` the function returns `method$n_samples + 1` samples
  where the first sample contains the parameter estimates from the
  original dataset and `method$n_samples` samples contain the parameter
  estimates from bootstrap samples. If `FALSE` the function returns
  `method$n_samples` samples containing the parameter estimates from
  bootstrap samples.

- use_samp_ids:

  Logical. If `TRUE`, the sampled subject ids are returned. Otherwise
  the subject ids from the original dataset are returned. These values
  are used to tell
  [`impute()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/impute.md)
  what subjects should be used to derive the imputed dataset.

- failure_limit:

  Number of failed samples that are allowed before throwing an error

- ncores:

  Number of processes to parallelise the job over

- quiet:

  Logical, If `TRUE` will suppress printing of progress information that
  is printed to the console.

## Value

A `draws` object which is a named list containing the following:

- `data`: R6 `longdata` object containing all relevant input data
  information.

- `method`: A `method` object as generated by either
  [`method_bayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md),
  [`method_approxbayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  or
  [`method_condmean()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md).

- `samples`: list containing the estimated parameters of interest. Each
  element of `samples` is a named list containing the following:

  - `ids`: vector of characters containing the ids of the subjects
    included in the original dataset.

  - `beta`: numeric vector of estimated regression coefficients.

  - `sigma`: list of estimated covariance matrices (one for each level
    of `vars$group`).

  - `theta`: numeric vector of transformed covariances.

  - `failed`: Logical. `TRUE` if the model fit failed.

  - `ids_samp`: vector of characters containing the ids of the subjects
    included in the given sample.

- `fit`: if
  [`method_bayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  is chosen, returns the MCMC Stan fit object. Otherwise `NULL`.

- `n_failures`: absolute number of failures of the model fit. Relevant
  only for `method_condmean(type = "bootstrap")`,
  [`method_approxbayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  and
  [`method_bmlmi()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md).

- `formula`: fixed effects formula object used for the model
  specification.

## Details

This function takes a `Stack` object which contains multiple lists of
patient ids. The function takes this Stack and pulls a set ids and then
constructs a dataset just consisting of these patients (i.e. potentially
a bootstrap or a jackknife sample).

The function then fits a MMRM model to this dataset to create a sample
object. The function repeats this process until `n_target_samples` have
been reached. If more than `failure_limit` samples fail to converge then
the function throws an error.

After reaching the desired number of samples the function generates and
returns a draws object.
