# Generate data

Generate data for a two-arms clinical trial with longitudinal continuous
outcome and two intercurrent events (ICEs). ICE1 may be thought of as a
discontinuation from study treatment due to study drug or condition
related (SDCR) reasons. ICE2 may be thought of as discontinuation from
study treatment due to uninformative study drop-out, i.e. due to not
study drug or condition related (NSDRC) reasons and outcome data after
ICE2 is always missing.

## Usage

``` r
simulate_data(pars_c, pars_t, post_ice1_traj, strategies = getStrategies())
```

## Arguments

- pars_c:

  A `simul_pars` object as generated by
  [`set_simul_pars()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/set_simul_pars.md).
  It specifies the simulation parameters of the control arm.

- pars_t:

  A `simul_pars` object as generated by
  [`set_simul_pars()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/set_simul_pars.md).
  It specifies the simulation parameters of the treatment arm.

- post_ice1_traj:

  A string which specifies how observed outcomes occurring after ICE1
  are simulated. Must target a function included in `strategies`.
  Possible choices are: Missing At Random `"MAR"`, Jump to Reference
  `"JR"`, Copy Reference `"CR"`, Copy Increments in Reference `"CIR"`,
  Last Mean Carried Forward `"LMCF"`. User-defined strategies could also
  be added. See
  [`getStrategies()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/getStrategies.md)
  for details.

- strategies:

  A named list of functions. Default equal to
  [`getStrategies()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/getStrategies.md).
  See
  [`getStrategies()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/getStrategies.md)
  for details.

## Value

A `data.frame` containing the simulated data. It includes the following
variables:

- `id`: Factor variable that specifies the id of each subject.

- `visit`: Factor variable that specifies the visit of each assessment.
  Visit `0` denotes the baseline visit.

- `group`: Factor variable that specifies which treatment group each
  subject belongs to.

- `outcome_bl`: Numeric variable that specifies the baseline outcome.

- `outcome_noICE`: Numeric variable that specifies the longitudinal
  outcome assuming no ICEs.

- `ind_ice1`: Binary variable that takes value `1` if the corresponding
  visit is affected by ICE1 and `0` otherwise.

- `dropout_ice1`: Binary variable that takes value `1` if the
  corresponding visit is affected by the drop-out following ICE1 and `0`
  otherwise.

- `ind_ice2`: Binary variable that takes value `1` if the corresponding
  visit is affected by ICE2.

- `outcome`: Numeric variable that specifies the longitudinal outcome
  including ICE1, ICE2 and the intermittent missing values.

## Details

The data generation works as follows:

- Generate outcome data for all visits (including baseline) from a
  multivariate normal distribution with parameters `pars_c$mu` and
  `pars_c$sigma` for the control arm and parameters `pars_t$mu` and
  `pars_t$sigma` for the treatment arm, respectively. Note that for a
  randomized trial, outcomes have the same distribution at baseline in
  both treatment groups, i.e. one should set `pars_c$mu[1]=pars_t$mu[1]`
  and `pars_c$sigma[1,1]=pars_t$sigma[1,1]`.

- Simulate whether ICE1 (study treatment discontinuation due to SDCR
  reasons) occurs after each visit according to parameters
  `pars_c$prob_ice1` and `pars_c$or_outcome_ice1` for the control arm
  and `pars_t$prob_ice1` and `pars_t$or_outcome_ice1` for the treatment
  arm, respectively.

- Simulate drop-out following ICE1 according to
  `pars_c$prob_post_ice1_dropout` and `pars_t$prob_post_ice1_dropout`.

- Simulate an additional uninformative study drop-out with probabilities
  `pars_c$prob_ice2` and `pars_t$prob_ice2` at each visit. This
  generates a second intercurrent event ICE2, which may be thought as
  treatment discontinuation due to NSDRC reasons with subsequent
  drop-out. The simulated time of drop-out is the subject's first visit
  which is affected by drop-out and data from this visit and all
  subsequent visits are consequently set to missing. If for a subject,
  both ICE1 and ICE2 are simulated to occur, then it is assumed that
  only the earlier of them counts. In case both ICEs are simulated to
  occur at the same time, it is assumed that ICE1 counts. This means
  that a single subject can experience either ICE1 or ICE2, but not both
  of them.

- Adjust trajectories after ICE1 according to the given assumption
  expressed with the `post_ice1_traj` argument. Note that only post-ICE1
  outcomes in the intervention arm can be adjusted. Post-ICE1 outcomes
  from the control arm are not adjusted.

- Simulate additional intermittent missing outcome data as per arguments
  `pars_c$prob_miss` and `pars_t$prob_miss`.

The probability of the ICE after each visit is modeled according to the
following logistic regression model:
`~ 1 + I(visit == 0) + ... + I(visit == n_visits-1) + I((x-alpha))`
where:

- `n_visits` is the number of visits (including baseline).

- `alpha` is the baseline outcome mean. The term `I((x-alpha))`
  specifies the dependency of the probability of the ICE on the current
  outcome value. The corresponding regression coefficients of the
  logistic model are defined as follows: The intercept is set to 0, the
  coefficients corresponding to discontinuation after each visit for a
  subject with outcome equal to the mean at baseline are set according
  to parameters `pars_c$prob_ice1` (`pars_t$prob_ice1`), and the
  regression coefficient associated with the covariate `I((x-alpha))` is
  set to `log(pars_c$or_outcome_ice1)` (`log(pars_t$or_outcome_ice1)`).

Please note that the baseline outcome cannot be missing nor be affected
by any ICEs.
