# Pool analysis results obtained from the imputed datasets

Pool analysis results obtained from the imputed datasets

## Usage

``` r
pool(
  results,
  conf.level = 0.95,
  alternative = c("two.sided", "less", "greater"),
  type = c("percentile", "normal")
)

# S3 method for class 'pool'
as.data.frame(x, ...)

# S3 method for class 'pool'
print(x, ...)

mcse(x, results)

# S3 method for class 'mcse'
as.data.frame(x, ...)

# S3 method for class 'mcse'
print(x, ..., pval_digits = 2, pval_eps = 1e-06, pval_nsmall = 5)
```

## Arguments

- results:

  an analysis object created by
  [`analyse()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/analyse.md).

- conf.level:

  confidence level of the returned confidence interval. Must be a single
  number between 0 and 1. Default is 0.95.

- alternative:

  a character string specifying the alternative hypothesis, must be one
  of `"two.sided"` (default), `"greater"` or `"less"`.

- type:

  a character string of either `"percentile"` (default) or `"normal"`.
  Determines what method should be used to calculate the bootstrap
  confidence intervals. See details. Only used if
  `method_condmean(type = "bootstrap")` was specified in the original
  call to
  [`draws()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/draws.md).

- x:

  a `pool` object generated by `pool()`.

- ...:

  not used.

- pval_digits:

  number of significant digits to print for p-values' MCSE.

- pval_eps:

  the minimum p-values' MCSE to print.

- pval_nsmall:

  the minimum number of digits to print for p-values' MCSE.

## Details

The calculation used to generate the point estimate, standard errors and
confidence interval depends upon the method specified in the original
call to
[`draws()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/draws.md); In
particular:

- [`method_approxbayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  &
  [`method_bayes()`](https://openpharma.github.io/rbmi/reference/method.md)
  both use Rubin's rules to pool estimates and variances across multiple
  imputed datasets, and the Barnard-Rubin rule to pool degree's of
  freedom; see Little & Rubin (2002). Here, the `mcse()` function can
  compute the Monte Carlo standard error (MCSE) of the pooled estimates,
  via a Jackknife variance estimator for all parameters; see Efron &
  Gong (1983) and Royston, Carlin & White (2009).

- `method_condmean(type = "bootstrap")` uses percentile or normal
  approximation; see Efron & Tibshirani (1994). Note that for the
  percentile bootstrap, no standard error is calculated, i.e. the
  standard errors will be `NA` in the object / `data.frame`.

- `method_condmean(type = "jackknife")` uses the standard jackknife
  variance formula; see Efron & Tibshirani (1994).

- `method_bmlmi` uses pooling procedure for Bootstrapped Maximum
  Likelihood MI (BMLMI). See Von Hippel & Bartlett (2021).

## References

Bradley Efron and Robert J Tibshirani. An introduction to the bootstrap.
CRC press, 1994. \[Section 11\]

Bradley Efron and Gail Gong. A leisurely look at the bootstrap, the
jackknife, and cross-validation. The American Statistician, 37(1):36-48,
1983.

Roderick J. A. Little and Donald B. Rubin. Statistical Analysis with
Missing Data, Second Edition. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey,
2002. \[Section 5.4\]

Royston, P., Carlin, J. B., & White, I. R. Multiple imputation of
missing values: New features for mim. Stata Journal, 9(2): 252-264,
2009.

Von Hippel, Paul T and Bartlett, Jonathan W. Maximum likelihood multiple
imputation: Faster imputations and consistent standard errors without
posterior draws. 2021.
